1
1.	 Artificial Intelligence: Definition, 
Origin and Evolution
1.1	
DEFINITION OF ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE
Artificial intelligence (AI), also but rarely known as computational intelli­
gence, is intelligence displayed by computers and other machines, as opposed 
to the natural intelligence displayed by humans and animals. AI has attracted 
the interest of intelligent humans for hundreds of years, long before the 1950s 
when Alan Turing, a British mathematician and computer scientist, wondered 
if machines could think like humans. Interest in AI pre-dates the coining in 
the 1950s of the term “artificial intelligence” by John McCarthy, an American 
computer and cognitive scientist. Since the second half of the twentieth cen­
tury, human intelligence has been able to create artificial intelligence in the 
form of machines that can learn and apply learning in ways that only humans 
could do, or so it was believed.
Today, we interact with AI through social media, online shopping, and search 
engines. We see AI in action every day, even though most users do not realise 
that they are using and interacting with AI. AI can be seen in, among others, dig­
ital assistants (Siri, Alexa, etc.), self-driving cars, navigation apps, social media 
algorithms, targeted advertisements, search engines, text editing, and gaming. 
Businesses use AI for a variety of purposes, including the automation of routine 
and repetitive tasks, fraud detection, and for obtaining valuable insights from 
the analysis of massive data sets, not to mention customer service, marketing, 
finance, and operations. In short, AI has become an integral part of our lives, 
whether we realise that or not, and this is why people have been increasingly 
searching for the meaning of AI by looking for a definition or description of AI. 
Figure 1.1 displays an index of Google searches for “artificial intelligence” rela­
tive to the peak of 100, which was reached in May 2023.
Even though AI has become rather ubiquitous, it is not easy to define because 
of its interdisciplinary and multifaceted nature and the diversity of its applica­
tions. In essence, however, AI refers to the ability of machines to perform tasks 
that typically require human intelligence, ranging from simple data analysis 
to decision-making in complex situations. An alternative term for artificial 
intelligence is “non-human intelligence,” a notion that can be traced back to 
 
Imad A. Moosa - 9781035345861
Downloaded from https://www.elgaronline.com/ at 05/18/2026 04:41:27AM
via free access

The economics of artificial intelligence
2
Greek philosophers. Sometimes, the term “human-like intelligence” is used 
to describe how machines can acquire and use human-like abilities such as 
deductive reasoning, inductive reasoning, mathematical reasoning, oral/writ­
ten comprehension, and oral/written expression (for example, Korteling et al., 
2021; Fleishman and Quaintance, 1984).
Before defining AI, perhaps it is useful to understand the meaning of the 
words “artificial” and “intelligence.” According to Dictionary​.co​m, the word 
“artificial” means “made by human skill” or “produced by humans”. The 
word “intelligence” means “the capacity, especially of a particular person or 
animal, for learning, reasoning, understanding and similar forms of mental 
activity.” By combining the two words, artificial intelligence has two defini­
tions in Dictionary​.co​m. The first is that AI is “the capacity of a computer, 
robot, programmed device, or software application to perform operations and 
tasks analogous to learning and decision making in humans, such as speech 
recognition and question answering.” The second definition is “the branch of 
computer science involved with the design of computers, robots, programmed 
Data source: Google Trends.
Figure 1.1    An index of the frequency of Google searches for “artificial 
intelligence” 
Imad A. Moosa - 9781035345861
Downloaded from https://www.elgaronline.com/ at 05/18/2026 04:41:27AM
via free access

Definition, origin and evolution
3
devices and software applications having the capacity to imitate human intel­
ligence and thought.”
Let us go back to the definition of intelligence on its own. Intelligence is 
defined by Manning (2020) as “the ability to learn and perform suitable tech­
niques to solve problems and achieve goals, appropriate to the context in an 
uncertain, ever-varying world.” It follows that intelligence encompasses the 
abilities to (i) solve problems, (ii) use knowledge to devise novel solutions to 
problems, (iii) learn something and improve upon it, and (iv) make a decision. 
Michael Bennett (2024) lists the terms used to describe human intelligence as 
smartness, understanding, brainpower, ability to reason, sharpness, and wis­
dom. However, he argues that “hundreds of definitions have been created, but 
for much of that time, intelligence has meant a biopsychological capacity to 
acquire and apply knowledge and skills.”
The pioneers of AI have come up with various definitions of intelligence. 
McCarthy (2007) proposed the definition that “intelligence is the computa­
tional part of the ability to achieve goals in the world,” suggesting that “vary­
ing kinds and degrees of intelligence occur in people, many animals and some 
machines.” For Newell (1990), an intelligent system “operates in real-time; 
exploits vast amounts of knowledge; tolerates erroneous, unexpected and pos­
sibly unknown inputs; uses symbols and abstractions; communicates using 
some form of natural language; learns from the environment; and exhibits 
adaptive goal-oriented behaviour.” Kurzweil (1990) argues that “there appears 
to be no simple definition of intelligence that is satisfactory to most observers, 
and most would-be definers of intelligence end up with long checklists of its 
attributes.”
Perhaps one way to understand artificial intelligence is to compare it with 
human intelligence. While human intelligence requires the use of the brain, 
memory, and cognitive abilities, AI relies on the data provided by humans. The 
two kinds of intelligence differ in many respects. In terms of processing, AI is 
based on algorithms and mathematical models provided by humans, whereas 
human intelligence is based on cognitive processes and biological structures. 
In terms of learning, AI is based on data and feedback loops, whereas human 
intelligence is based on experience, intuition, and creativity. They also differ 
in terms of the speed of executing tasks because AI can process data and per­
form tasks much more quickly than the most intelligent humans can, but this 
does not make machines better than humans because humans can make com­
plex decisions quickly. In terms of emotions, machines are devoid of emotions 
and empathy, whereas humans are capable of feeling emotions and empathy. 
Likewise, machines have no moral code or conscience, whereas humans (albeit 
not all of them) are guided by a moral code and conscience when they make 
decisions. In terms of creativity, machines have a limited ability to be creative 
or think “outside of the box,” whereas humans can be creative, imaginative, 
Imad A. Moosa - 9781035345861
Downloaded from https://www.elgaronline.com/ at 05/18/2026 04:41:27AM
via free access

The economics of artificial intelligence
4
and innovative. Last but not least, machines (unlike humans) are not exposed 
to physical limitations and can operate continuously, subject to maintenance. 
Humans, on the other hand, have limited physical capabilities and require rest. 
Unlike humans, machines do not mix business with pleasure.
John McCarthy, the computer scientist who coined the term “artificial intel­
ligence,” defined AI very simply as “the science and engineering of making 
intelligent machines” (Manning, 2020). A slightly more modern definition of 
AI is that it is a “broad branch of computer science concerned with creating 
machines that can learn, make decisions, and perform tasks to a human-like 
level” (Tableu, 2024). Otherwise, it is defined as a “specialty within computer 
science that is concerned with creating systems that can replicate human intel­
ligence and problem-solving abilities.” IBM (2024) defines AI as “technology 
that enables computers and machines to simulate human intelligence and prob­
lem-solving capabilities.” Russell and Norvig (2021) define AI as a “field of 
research in computer science that develops and studies methods and software 
which enable machines to perceive their environment and uses learning and 
intelligence to take actions that maximize their chances of achieving defined 
goals.”
AI may be defined in terms of the ability of AI systems to think or act like 
humans or rationally. Bellman (1978) defines AI as “the automation of activi­
ties associated with human thinking, which include decision making, problem 
solving, and learning.” This is a description of systems that think like humans. 
A definition that describes systems that think rationally is that AI is “the 
study of the computations that make it possible to perceive, reason, and act” 
(Winston, 1992). Kurzweil (1990) defines AI as “the art of creating machines 
that perform functions that require intelligence when performed by people,” 
which is a description of systems that act like humans. Luger and Stubblefield 
(1993) define AI, in terms of systems that act rationally, as the “branch of com­
puter science that is concerned with the automation of intelligent behaviour.”
A question that remains is the following: what is in a definition that moti­
vates the desire to find a definition for AI? For example, is it informative to 
define a car as “an entity that is used to move people and goods from one place 
to another, propelled by an internal combustion engine that derives power 
from liquid fuel according to the laws of thermodynamics”? Is it informative 
to define water as a “chemical compound with a molecule that consists of two 
atoms of hydrogen and one atom of oxygen”? In both cases, the answer should 
be in the negative because we recognise cars and water when we see them. 
Even though AI is more opaque than cars and water, a definition of AI is not 
informative as long as we know that AI is about teaching machines how to 
think and operate like humans.
Rather than trying to understand what AI is by looking at various defini­
tions, one can do that by observing a robot tasked with welding car parts on a 
Imad A. Moosa - 9781035345861
Downloaded from https://www.elgaronline.com/ at 05/18/2026 04:41:27AM
via free access

Definition, origin and evolution
5
conveyor belt in a car factory, or a robot that beats chess grandmasters at their 
own game. If a layperson asks what artificial intelligence is, a good answer 
would be that it is the human endeavour that has created the annoying machine 
that talks to you when you call your bank, expecting to talk to a human being. 
It is also the human endeavour that has created the Google search engine, 
which takes a few seconds to give you thousands of results when you type 
“artificial intelligence.” This is the same product of AI that has significantly 
reduced the time it takes to write a book like this one, without having to visit a 
physical library. It follows that the statement “there has yet to be a universally 
accepted technical or legal definition of AI” is an unnecessary dramatisation 
of a trivial matter.
1.2	
EVOLUTION OF AI: THE ORIGIN
The modern conception of AI emerged in the 1950s as a result of significant 
advancements in computing technology, as well as logic and mathematics. 
However, the origin of AI can be traced back to ancient inventors and thinkers 
who contemplated the possibility of creating artificial beings that have human-
like abilities. Furthermore, without the groundwork that began in the early 
1900s, it would not have been possible for early AI experts to come up with 
their innovative work in the 1950s. In this section, we examine the pre-1900 
period.
The notion of AI goes back thousands of years to the times when ancient 
philosophers considered questions of life and death. Human history pro­
vides abundant stories about ancient inventors who produced mechanical 
devices that moved without human intervention. According to Encyclopaedia 
Britannica (2024), an automaton is “any of various mechanical objects that 
are relatively self-operating after they have been set in motion.” The term is 
also applied to a “class of electromechanical devices that transform informa­
tion from one form into another on the basis of predetermined instructions or 
procedures.” Andrews (2023) describes seven early robots and automatons, 
which include the sixteenth-century mechanical monk, Al-Jazari’s floating 
orchestra, Archytas’ Dove, the silver swan, Jaquet-Droz’s three automatons, 
Vaucanson’s duck, and Da Vinci’s knight. Encyclopaedia Britannica (2024) 
refers to the wooden pigeon of Archytas, who was a friend of Plato, as “among 
the earliest references” to an automaton and notes that more complete informa­
tion about similar devices can be found in the writings of Heron of Alexandria 
(first century CE), who described devices propelled by water, falling weights, 
and steam.
Even in the Middle Ages of Western Europe (the period extending between 
the collapse of the Roman Empire in the fifth century CE and the period of the 
Renaissance), automatons were created by the likes of Roger Bacon (a medieval 
Imad A. Moosa - 9781035345861
Downloaded from https://www.elgaronline.com/ at 05/18/2026 04:41:27AM
via free access

The economics of artificial intelligence
6
English philosopher who was interested in experimental science) and Albertus 
Magnus (a German thinker who established the study of nature as a legitimate 
science within the Christian tradition). Both Bacon and Magnus are credited 
with constructing androids (humanoid robots or other artificial beings, typi­
cally made from a flesh-like material). More specifically, Bacon invented a 
talking head, whereas Magnus constructed an iron man. The French Gothic 
architect Villard de Honnecourt compiled a sketchbook in which he illustrated 
decorative mechanical objects for churches.
Renewed interest in the production of automatons emerged in the early six­
teenth century, largely stemming from the influence of Eastern inventions, 
which arrived in Europe through trade with the Orient. Also influential was 
the translation from ancient Greek of the writings of Heron of Alexandria on 
mechanical objects. In the mid-fifteenth century, the use of coiled tempered-
steel springs as a portable source of motion became widespread. It was used, 
for instance, to make table ornaments in the form of sailing ships. Among the 
more elaborate mechanical devices that became popular in the eighteenth cen­
tury were mechanical pictures, in which windmills and other features sprang 
to life by means of hidden clockwork. In 1813, the Rochat brothers, who manu­
factured miniature singing birds, decided to open their own shop in Geneva, 
where they assembled their birds and shipped them to London (the centre of 
finance and commerce at that time) to be exported to the rest of the world. 
With the exception of a few works of Peter Carl Fabergé (a Russian goldsmith 
and jeweller who is best known for his Fabergé eggs), the production of costly 
artistic automatons virtually came to an end in the late nineteenth century and 
early twentieth century because of the near extinction of skilled craftsmen and 
the rich patrons who supported them.
1.3	
EVOLUTION OF AI: GROUNDWORK (1900–1950)
The word “robot” emerged in the 1920s, not as a result of the work of a math­
ematician, engineer, or inventor, but rather out of the work of a Czech play­
wright who, in 1921, released the science fiction play “Rossum’s Universal 
Robots.” The play introduced the notion of “artificial people,” which he called 
“robots”—that was the first known use of the word. The story, according to the 
English translation of the play, goes as follows (Capek, 2019):
The play is set on an island somewhere on our planet, and on this island is the cen­
tral office of the factory of Rossum’s Universal Robots. “Robot” is a Czech word 
meaning “worker.” When the play opens, a few decades beyond the present day, the 
factory has already turned out, following a secret formula, hundreds of thousands, 
and even millions, of manufactured workmen, living automatons, without souls, 
desires, or feelings. They are high-powered laborers, good for nothing but work. 
There are two grades, the unskilled and the skilled, and specially trained workmen 
Imad A. Moosa - 9781035345861
Downloaded from https://www.elgaronline.com/ at 05/18/2026 04:41:27AM
via free access

Definition, origin and evolution
7
are furnished on request…. The rest of the play is magnificent melodrama, superbly 
portrayed, with the handful of human beings at bay while the unseen myriads of 
their own robots close in on them. The final scene is like Dunsany on a mammoth 
scale… Then comes the epilogue, in which Alquist, the company’s builder, is not 
only the only human being on the island, but also the only one left on earth. The 
robots have destroyed the rest of mankind.
In 1929, a Japanese biologist, who was alarmed by Capek’s play, built the 
first Japanese robot, Gakutensoku, which means “learning from the rules of 
nature.” In an article published in the Osaka Mainichi newspaper, Makoto 
Nishimura (1883–1956) said that he was concerned because Capek’s play 
convincingly portrayed “the emergence of a perverse world in which humans 
become subordinate to artificial humans” (Frumer, 2020). Nishimura believed 
that the character of artificial humans was determined by the intentions of 
their creators. He also believed that if humanoids were intended to be slave 
workers, taking orders from their human masters, this situation would inevi­
tably lead to the emergence of an “exploited underclass that was bound to 
rebel,” which is exactly what happened in the play. As a result, Nishimura 
was apprehensive about a dystopian scenario that he described as humanity 
“destroyed by the pinnacle of its creation.” In response, he envisaged a uto­
pian scenario by creating a conscientious, altruistic, and empathetic artificial 
human, a robot that was not a slave but a friend and a partner, even a role 
model. In 1926, Nishimura resigned his position as a professor at Hokkaido 
Imperial University, moved to Osaka, and devoted his time to the building of 
his ideal artificial human.
In 1949, Edmund Berkley, a computer scientist, published a book, Giant 
Brains, or Machines That Think, in which he compared the newer models 
of computers to human brains. In his description of the book, Berkley (1949) 
opined the following:
The subject of this book is a type of machine that comes closer to being a brain 
that thinks than any machine ever did before 1940. These new machines are called 
sometimes mechanical brains and sometimes sequence-controlled calculators and 
sometimes by other names. Essentially, though, they are machines that can handle 
information with great skill and great speed. And that power is very similar to the 
power of a brain.
Berkley envisaged the characteristics of the new machines that make them 
important: (i) they do the work of hundreds of humans for the wages of a 
dozen; (ii) they are powerful tools for the endeavour to obtain new knowledge; 
(iii) they can be used in science, business, government, and other activities; 
and (iv) the harder the underlying problem, the more useful these machines 
become. Two of these points pertain to the economics of AI, which is the 
Imad A. Moosa - 9781035345861
Downloaded from https://www.elgaronline.com/ at 05/18/2026 04:41:27AM
via free access

The economics of artificial intelligence
8
subject matter of this book. The first is that a profit-maximising firm can cut 
costs by employing machines rather than humans, which is one of the main 
issues discussed in this book and arguably the most adverse consequence of 
AI. The second is that these machines can be used across the economy in a 
wide range of applications, as we are going to see in Chapter 3.
1.4	
EVOLUTION: BIRTH, EARLY DEVELOPMENT AND 
SETBACK (1950–1979)
The birth of AI is believed to have taken place during the period 1950–56. This 
period witnessed the publication of Alan Turing’s influential book Computer 
Machinery and Intelligence (Turing, 1950), as well as the emergence of the 
term “artificial intelligence.” The same period also witnessed the development 
of symbolic AI systems, which relied on rule-based reasoning and symbolic 
manipulation of data. Researchers (such as John McCarthy, Marvin Minsky, 
and Herbert Simon) pioneered this approach to the building of machines that 
can indulge in logical reasoning and perform problem solving. Symbolic AI 
relies on explicit, human-readable symbols to represent knowledge and infor­
mation, enabling logical manipulation and reasoning.
In the 1950s, Alan Turing laid the theoretical groundwork for computational 
thinking and machine intelligence, which made him influential in the develop­
ment of theoretical computer science and a founder of AI. Turing (1950) raised 
the question of whether or not machines can think. He started by defining the 
terms “machine” and “think,” which he explained as follows:
I PROPOSE to consider the question, ‘Can machines think?’ This should begin 
with definitions of the meaning of the terms ‘machine’ and ‘think’. The definitions 
might be framed so as to reflect so far as possible the normal use of the words, but 
this attitude is dangerous. If the meaning of the words ‘machine’ and ‘think’ are 
to be found by examining how they are commonly used it is difficult to escape the 
conclusion that the meaning and the answer to the question, ‘Can machines think?’ 
is to be sought in a statistical survey such as a Gallup poll. But this is absurd. 
Instead of attempting such a definition I shall replace the question by another, 
which is closely related to it and is expressed in relatively unambiguous words.
Accordingly, he suggested that the new form of the problem could be described 
in terms of a game that he called the “imitation game,” eventually formulating 
the “Turing Test,” whereby a human interrogator tries to distinguish between 
the text responses generated by computers and humans. The Turing Test is 
used to determine whether or not a machine can demonstrate human intelli­
gence, which happens if it can engage in a conversation with a human without 
being detected as a machine.
Imad A. Moosa - 9781035345861
Downloaded from https://www.elgaronline.com/ at 05/18/2026 04:41:27AM
via free access

Definition, origin and evolution
9
In 1952, a computer scientist named Arthur Samuel developed a program 
to play checkers, which was the first ever to learn the game independently. 
According to Knopp (2023), Samuel’s “groundbreaking checkers program, 
developed in the early days of AI (on an IBM 701 computer), played a pivotal 
role in advancing the field of AI.” The program involved one of the very first 
examples of non-numerical computation (early computers were intended and 
designed primarily for number crunching). Samuel went on to popularise the 
term “machine learning” as his checkers program highlighted the potential 
of algorithms to learn and improve through experience. He investigated two 
machine-learning procedures by using checkers, reaching the conclusion that 
“enough work has been done to verify the fact that a computer can be pro­
grammed so that it will learn to play a better game of checkers than can be 
played by the person who wrote the program,” adding that “the principles of 
machine learning verified by these experiments are, of course, applicable to 
many other situations’ (Samuel, 1959).
In the summer of 1956, John McCarthy, Marvin Minsky, Nathaniel 
Rochester, and Claude Shannon coined the term “artificial intelligence” in a 
proposal that they wrote to call for the convening of the famous Dartmouth 
Conference, which was held at Dartmouth College (McCarthy et al., 1955). 
The proposal started with the following introduction:
We propose that a 2 month, 10 man study of artificial intelligence be carried out 
during the summer of 1956 at Dartmouth College….The study is to proceed on the 
basis of the conjecture that every aspect of learning or any other feature of intel­
ligence can in principle be so precisely described that a machine can be made to 
simulate it. An attempt will be made to find how to make machines use language, 
form abstractions and concepts, solve kinds of problems now reserved for humans.
The Dartmouth Conference, held in Hanover (New Hampshire), brought 
together the intellectual power of those who were passionate about the emer­
gent idea of designing intelligent machines. One of the pivotal outcomes of 
the conference was the conceptual exploration of AI, touching upon neural 
networks, theories of the human brain, machine self-improvement, abstrac­
tion, and creativity. The conference paved the way for a number of AI break­
throughs in subsequent years.
In 1956, Allen Newell, Cliff Shaw, and Herbert Simon were working at the 
Rand Corporation in Santa Monica, California, where they created the Logic 
Theorist (LT), which was the first program designed to perform automated 
reasoning. It has been described as “the first artificial intelligence program” 
because of its ability to mimic the problem-solving skills of a human being (for 
example, McCorduck, 2004). The Rand Corporation team used the program 
for proving theorems found in Principia Mathematica, a three-volume book 
on the foundations of mathematics that was originally published in 1910–1913 
Imad A. Moosa - 9781035345861
Downloaded from https://www.elgaronline.com/ at 05/18/2026 04:41:27AM
via free access

The economics of artificial intelligence
10
(Whitehead and Russell, 1963). Simon (1998) described Logic Theorist and 
the reason for using Principia Mathematica as follows:
LT was based on the system of Principia Mathematica, largely because a copy of 
that work happened to sit in my bookshelf. There was no intention of making a con­
tribution to symbolic logic, and the system of Principia was sufficiently outmoded 
by that time as to be inappropriate for that purpose. For us, the important considera­
tion was not the precise task, but its suitability for demonstrating that a computer 
could discover problem solutions in a complex nonnumerical domain by heuristic 
search that used humanoid heuristics.
The period from the late 1950s through the 1960s witnessed the invention 
of programming languages that are still in use, as well as the publication of 
books and screening of movies that explored the notion of robots, making AI 
a mainstream idea. In 1958, John McCarthy created List Processing (LISP) 
as the first programming language used for AI research, which is in popular 
use to this day. LISP became a common language for AI programming, partly 
because of the confluence of LISP and AI work at MIT and partly because 
AI programs that are capable of “learning” could be written in LISP (see, for 
example, Hemmendinger, 2024).
The 1960s started with the introduction in 1961 of the first industrial robot 
that was put to work on an assembly line in General Motors factories, designed 
specifically to do jobs deemed too dangerous for humans. In 1965, Edward 
Feigenbaum and Joshua Lederberg created the first “expert system,” which 
was a form of AI programmed to replicate the thinking and decision-making 
abilities of human experts. The system, called DENDRAL, was designed to 
carry out chemical analysis to help chemists identify unknown organic mol­
ecules. In 1966, Joseph Weizenbaum invented the first chatbot that used natu­
ral language processing (NLP) to converse with humans. In that same year, a 
Soviet mathematician, Alexey Ivakhnenko, proposed a new approach to AI 
that would later become known as “deep learning.”
The development of AI witnessed a setback in the 1970s. In 1973, a British 
applied mathematician named James Lighthill submitted a report to the British 
Science Council, known as the Lighthill Report, in which he presented a very 
pessimistic outlook for research on AI, stating that “in no part of the field 
have the discoveries made so far produced the major impact that was then 
promised” (Lighthill, 1973). Lighthill claimed that AI researchers had failed 
to address the issue of combinatorial explosion when solving problems within 
real-world domains. He also suggested that AI techniques may work within 
the scope of small problem domains, but the techniques are inadequate for 
solving more realistic problems (see, for example, Howe, 2007; Russell and 
Norvig, 2021). In 1979, however, the Stanford Cart became an early example 
Imad A. Moosa - 9781035345861
Downloaded from https://www.elgaronline.com/ at 05/18/2026 04:41:27AM
via free access

Definition, origin and evolution
11
of an autonomous vehicle when it navigated successfully, and without human 
interference, a room full of chairs (see, for example, Earnest, 2012).
1.5	
EVOLUTION: BOOM FOLLOWED BY SLUMP 
(1980–1992)
The 1980s saw a shift towards machine learning techniques, intended to ena­
ble computers to learn from data and make predictions without explicit pro­
gramming. This period witnessed the emergence of algorithms such as neural 
networks, decision trees, and genetic algorithms, laying the groundwork for 
modern AI applications. The 1980s also witnessed rapid growth and rising 
interest in AI as a result of some notable breakthroughs and the expansion of 
government funding to support AI research. Deep learning and expert sys­
tems allowed computers to learn from their mistakes and make independent 
decisions.
Expert systems are computer systems that can emulate the decision-making 
abilities of humans. In 1980, the first commercial expert system, XCON, was 
launched, allowing customers to order computer systems automatically and 
validate the technical configurability of their orders. The system also provided 
guidance on the assembly of the hardware. Further developments include the 
advent of the autonomous drawing program, AARON, which is described by 
Garcia (2016) as “one of the longest-running, continually maintained AI sys­
tems in history.” In 1986, Ernst Dickmann demonstrated the first driverless 
car. And in 1987, Alacrity became the first managerial advisory system that 
was available commercially (see, for example, Cook and Sterling, 1989).
In 1984, the Association for the Advancement of Artificial Intelligence 
(AAAI) warned of a looming “AI Winter,” predicting that the funding of and 
interest in AI would diminish, which would hamper research. The reason for 
the loss of interest by the private sector, and also the public sector, was the per­
ceived high cost-to-return ratio, which was a sign of the end of a hype cycle (see 
Chapter 8). Schuchmann (2019) thinks that the 1980s AI Winter came in 1988, 
but he calls it the second AI Winter, following the first AI Winter of 1973. In 
1987, the market for LISP-based hardware collapsed owing to the emergence 
of cheaper and more accessible competitors that could run LISP software, 
including those offered by IBM and Apple. The shift in market conditions 
led to the failure of many specialised LISP companies. Computers made by 
Apple and IBM became more powerful than LISP machines and other expert 
systems, which were expensive to maintain. Still, the year 1988 witnessed the 
invention of a chatbot called Jabberwacky, which was capable of conducting 
conversations with humans. Jabberwacky’s new version, Cleverbot, performed 
so well in convincing humans that they were not talking to a machine that it 
passed the Turing Test spectacularly (see, for example, Dey, 2019).
Imad A. Moosa - 9781035345861
Downloaded from https://www.elgaronline.com/ at 05/18/2026 04:41:27AM
via free access

The economics of artificial intelligence
12
1.6	
EVOLUTION: RESURGENCE FOLLOWED BY 
EXPLOSION (1993–PRESENT)
The early 1990s witnessed significant leaps in AI research, including the intro­
duction of the first AI system that could beat a reigning world champion in his 
own game (chess). In 1997, a computer system developed by IBM, Deep Blue, 
managed to beat the world chess champion, Garry Kasparov, in a highly-pub­
licised match. Around the same time, Windows released speech recognition 
software (developed by Dragon Systems). Several inventions followed: Kismet, 
the robot that could simulate human emotions (2000), Roomba the vacuum 
cleaner (2002), Watson the Jeopardy winner (2011), and Siri the virtual assis­
tant (2011).
An explosion in AI products has been witnessed since 2012, particularly the 
growth of applications utilising deep learning and big data (data sets that are 
too large or complex to be dealt with by traditional data-processing software). 
Unfortunately, one of these applications is AI-driven autonomous weapons 
(something like robots with machine guns deciding independently whom to 
shoot). This application became a new item on the wish list of generals, the 
military-industrial complex, and war-mongering politicians. In response, over 
1,000 high-profile AI experts and leading researchers (including Elon Musk, 
Stephen Hawking, and Steve Wozniak) signed an open letter in 2015 warning 
of a “military artificial intelligence arms race” and calling for a ban on “offen­
sive autonomous weapons.” The letter, presented at the International Joint 
Conference on Artificial Intelligence in Buenos Aires, described autonomous 
weapons as the “third revolution in warfare, after gunpowder and nuclear 
arms” (Gibbs, 2015).
However, the peaceful, welfare-enhancing AI devices kept on coming. Even 
though generative AI (which can be used to create new content, including 
audio, code, images, text, and videos) was introduced in the 1960s in chatbots, 
it was not until 2014, with the introduction of generative adversarial networks 
(GANs), that generative AI became capable of creating authentic images, vid­
eos, and audio of real people. In 2016, Sophia was created as the first “robot 
citizen” with a realistic human appearance and the ability to replicate and 
exhibit emotions. In 2017, Facebook programmed two AI chatbots to converse 
and learn how to negotiate. In 2020, OpenAI embarked on testing Generative 
Pre-trained Transformers (GPTs), starting with GPT-3, a model that was the 
first to create content almost indistinguishable from what can be produced 
by humans in their fields of expertise. In 2021, OpenAI developed DALL-E, 
which can process and understand images to the extent that it can produce 
accurate captions. Following its release in November 2022, ChatGPT reached 
over a million users in five days and 100 million users within two months, 
Imad A. Moosa - 9781035345861
Downloaded from https://www.elgaronline.com/ at 05/18/2026 04:41:27AM
via free access

Definition, origin and evolution
13
making it the fastest-growing consumer app ever at the time (see, for example, 
Bianchi, 2024).
Following GPT-3, GPT-4 was released in March 2023, with enhanced abili­
ties to write essays and articles and create art and music. GPT-5, which was 
released in September 2024, is significantly more advanced than its predeces­
sor because of its ability to process and generate not just text, but also speech, 
images, code, and videos. Because it is so advanced, GPT-5 represents a sig­
nificant step towards artificial general intelligence (AGI), a form of AI that 
surpasses human intelligence. Sravanthi (2024) notes that “while ChatGPT-5 
is not an AGI system itself, it exhibits characteristics that align with the goals 
of AGI research.”
On 15 February 2024, OpenAI announced the release of Sora, an AI model 
that can create realistic and imaginative scenes from text instructions. On 22 
February 2024, StabilityAI announced the introduction of Stable Diffusion 3, 
a text-to-image open model based on a similar architecture to Sora. Other GPT 
models have been developed by companies other than OpenAI. For example, 
EleutherAI has created a series of GPT foundation models, while Cerebras has 
developed seven models. Furthermore, companies across various industries 
have developed GPT models tailored to their specific needs. Examples include 
Salesforce’s EinsteinGPT for customer relationship management (CRM) and 
Bloomberg’s BloombergGPT for finance. By the time this book is published 
(sometime in 2025), new marvellous AI inventions will have appeared.
In 2023, the global AI market size was close to $208 billion. By 2030, 
the market size is expected to reach nearly $2 trillion, according to figures 
provided by Statista (Figure 1.2). The size of the AI market is measured by 
spending on hardware and services that enable firms and government depart­
ments to develop and deploy AI applications. The AI market consists of the 
markets for computer vision (applications that enable computers to interpret 
and understand digital images and video data), machine learning (algorithms 
that enable computer systems to learn from data), natural language process­
ing (applications that enable computers to understand, interpret, and generate 
human language), robotics and autonomous technology (machines and systems 
that operate independently), and generative AI (used to generate content that is 
indistinguishable from content created by humans.
1.7	
THE TRANSFORMATIVE AND DISRUPTIVE 
POWER OF THE AI REVOLUTION
A technology is disruptive if it starts by serving a niche market (a very specific 
segment of consumers who are likely to buy a particular product) and then 
expands to the mainstream (the average or typical consumer). Mann (2023) 
suggests that transformation and disruption are related by arguing that “a 
Imad A. Moosa - 9781035345861
Downloaded from https://www.elgaronline.com/ at 05/18/2026 04:41:27AM
via free access

The economics of artificial intelligence
14
disruptive technology is technology which can transform the way people and 
businesses operate.” AI is considered to be the fourth technological revolution, 
following the agricultural, industrial, and digital revolutions, all of which have 
produced transformative and disruptive effects on society and the economy. 
The agricultural revolution, which began around 10,000 BCE, marked the 
transition from mobile communities of hunters to settled agricultural commu­
nities. Innovations (such as the domestication of plants and animals, the inven­
tion of the plough, and the development of irrigation systems) made it possible 
to produce surplus food, which supported larger populations and allowed the 
establishment of permanent settlements.
The Industrial Revolution, which started in the eighteenth century, marked 
a transition from agrarian to industrial economies and the emergence of urban 
communities. Powered by advancements in steam power, mechanisation, and 
the techniques of mass production, industries (such as textiles, manufactur­
ing, and transportation) underwent radical transformations. The invention 
of the steam engine, the spinning jenny, and the power loom revolutionised 
Data source: Statista.
Figure 1.2    World market for AI ($ billion)
Imad A. Moosa - 9781035345861
Downloaded from https://www.elgaronline.com/ at 05/18/2026 04:41:27AM
via free access

Definition, origin and evolution
15
production processes, leading to unprecedented levels of productivity and eco­
nomic growth. The Industrial Revolution also fuelled urban migration, social 
upheaval, and the rise of capitalism, shaping the modern world in profound 
ways. The mechanisation of agriculture in the late nineteenth century and 
early twentieth century represents another significant technological disruption 
because it displaced millions of farm workers, contributing to rural depopula­
tion and migration to urban centres in search of employment opportunities.
The digital revolution, which began in the mid-twentieth century, marked the 
advent of computing, telecommunications, and digital technologies. A new era 
of technological disruption began with the introduction of innovations such as 
the personal computer, the internet, and mobile technologies, leading to a radi­
cal transformation of communication, commerce, and entertainment. While 
these developments allowed more efficient production techniques, they also 
raised concerns about job displacement. Breakthroughs (such as the invention 
of the transistor, the development of integrated circuits, and the advent of the 
internet) transformed the way information is processed, stored, and transmit­
ted. This wave of technological progress also allowed the rise of new indus­
tries (such as software development, telecommunications, and e-commerce) 
that propelled economic growth and globalisation.
The emergence of AI represents the latest chapter in the story of techno­
logical disruption. Technological breakthroughs have enabled AI systems to 
perform tasks that were thought to be exclusive to human intelligence. AI is 
transformative and disruptive because it is reshaping industries, professions, 
and modes of work. The historical precedents of technological disruption offer 
valuable insights into the potential implications and challenges posed by AI. 
For example, it has led to the emergence of a new class of the super-rich, the 
high-tech billionaires. While disruptive technologies have historically spurred 
economic growth and prosperity, they have also exacerbated inequality, dis­
placed traditional forms of labour, and reshaped social structures. All of these 
characteristics are valid for AI. However, Eric Schmidt (a former CEO of 
Google) believes that “AI is likely to be the most transformative technology of 
our time” (Choat, 2023). In other words, this time it is different!
AI represents a disruptive innovation that challenges existing paradigms, 
processes, and industries because it has reshaped the way people work, commu­
nicate, and live. AI drives economic transformation by enhancing productivity, 
creating new industries, and fostering innovation. AI-powered applications in 
areas such as healthcare, finance, and transportation create new opportunities 
for growth, efficiency, and competitiveness, driving economic expansion and 
prosperity. AI has profound social implications, including job displacement, 
skills mismatch, and income inequality. Gruetzemacher and Whittlestone 
(2022) examine the transformative power of AI, arguing that “transformative 
AI” reflects “the possibility that advanced AI systems could have very large 
Imad A. Moosa - 9781035345861
Downloaded from https://www.elgaronline.com/ at 05/18/2026 04:41:27AM
via free access

The economics of artificial intelligence
16
impacts on society without reaching human-level cognitive abilities.” They go 
on to distinguish among narrowly transformative AI, transformative AI, and 
radically transformative AI.
While comparisons between AI and previous technological revolutions 
reveal similarities in terms of disruptive innovation, economic transformation, 
and social impacts, AI exhibits unique characteristics, including its global 
scale, rapid pace of change, and human-centric nature. An ongoing debate 
centres on the power of AI to displace labour and create mass unemployment. 
Most observers adopt the attitude of “no worries” on the grounds that new 
technologies create more jobs than the jobs they destroy, and AI is no excep­
tion. However, there are those who believe that this time it is different and 
that we should start seriously thinking about how to respond to the disruptive 
power of AI. For example, Elon Musk believes that no job is immune from the 
effect of AI, which will make it necessary for governments to pay their citizens 
universal basic income. We will come back to this issue and discuss it in detail 
in Chapter 6.
1.8	
EVOLUTION OF AI: SUMMING UP
The evolution of AI is characterised by waves of technological advancement, 
each wave marking a significant milestone in the evolution of intelligent sys­
tems. From a humble beginning in the 1950s, the field of AI has gone through 
significant transformations, propelled by breakthroughs in computing power, 
algorithmic innovations, and the availability of big data. We have gone through 
a detailed chronology of the evolution of AI, starting from ancient times. In 
this concluding section, we highlight key developments, paradigm shifts, and 
the impact on society, the economy, and human-machine interaction. With 
respect to paradigm shifts, Dhar (2023) summarises the evolution of AI in 
terms of shifts from expert systems to machine learning to deep learning and 
finally to general-purpose technology.
The two decades of the 1950s and 1960s witnessed the first wave of AI, 
which was rooted in symbolic logic and rule-based systems. The objective of 
symbolic logic was to encode human knowledge and expertise to formulate 
rules and representations that enabled computers to perform tasks involving 
logical reasoning and problem-solving. A prominent application of symbolic 
AI was the construction of expert systems that emulated the decision-making 
ability of human experts in specific fields such as medicine, finance, and engi­
neering. However, expert systems lacked the ability to learn from data or adapt 
to new situations.
The second wave of AI, observed in the 1980s and 1990s, is known as the 
“connectionist revolution,” where connectionism is an approach to AI that 
developed out of attempts to understand how the human brain works at the 
Imad A. Moosa - 9781035345861
Downloaded from https://www.elgaronline.com/ at 05/18/2026 04:41:27AM
via free access

Definition, origin and evolution
17
neural level—in particular, how people learn and remember. Connectionist 
models of language resemble, in one way or another, the central nervous sys­
tem of humans. Inspired by the structure and functioning of the human brain, 
researchers explored the use of artificial neural networks for pattern recogni­
tion, classification, and function approximation. Breakthroughs such as the 
backpropagation algorithm and the development of deep learning reignited 
interest in neural networks, paving the way for their application in speech 
recognition, image processing, and natural language understanding. However, 
limitations in computational resources and algorithmic scalability hindered 
widespread adoption during this period.
The third wave of AI began in the early twenty-first century, propelled by a 
combination of big data, powerful computers, and advances in deep learning 
that led to breakthroughs in image recognition, natural language processing, 
and game playing. This wave of AI witnessed the rise of AI-driven applica­
tions in diverse domains, including autonomous vehicles, healthcare diagnos­
tics, and personalised recommendation systems.
The fourth wave of AI is characterised by the integration of AI with human-
centric technologies. For example, Internet of Things (IoT) devices enable AI 
to operate in real time, empowering applications such as smart cities, indus­
trial automation, and wearable devices. Furthermore, emphasis has shifted to 
human-centric AI, where intelligent systems are designed to collaborate with 
humans, augmenting human capabilities rather than replacing them. This wave 
of AI also raises ethical, societal, and regulatory considerations, prompting 
discussions on transparency, accountability, and bias mitigation. We will come 
back to this issue in Chapter 5 when we discuss the adverse consequences of 
AI.
As AI continues to evolve and permeate various aspects of our lives, it is 
essential to approach its development and deployment with caution, ensuring 
that it serves the collective good while mitigating potential risks. By under­
standing the historical context, conceptual frameworks, and implications of 
AI, we can navigate its complexities and harness its transformative potential 
for the betterment of humanity.
Imad A. Moosa - 9781035345861
Downloaded from https://www.elgaronline.com/ at 05/18/2026 04:41:27AM
via free access