Se7en
-Movie Review-
5/5
David Fincher’s “Se7en” is one of the most sinisterly dismal and disturbing films of all time, but simultaneously, it has an eminently memorable and powerful message. Standing out from other crime movies, its ingenious concept keeps us on the edge of our seat throughout the whole film, and has us stunned after what may just be one of the most sensational endings in the history of cinema.
Se7en follows two detectives, Somerset(Morgan Freeman) and Mills(Brad Pitt) on their hunt for a deranged serial killer. The reoccurring murders follow a pattern and an idea - they are committed according to the 7 deadly sins: Sloth, Gluttony, Greed, Lust, Envy, Pride and Wrath. This already denotes that the killer wishes to send a message through these acts, they have a meaning and a purpose. Throughout the film, we observe how calculated and hauntingly intelligent the murderer truly is, as his identity remains anonymous to the other characters as well as the audience until the very end.
The concept of the film is very interesting, as it has the audience wondering which sin the killer will pick next, and how he will represent it. The movie also has us questioning our own morals and principles, which makes the plot feel more real, as it raises real questions and feelings. This is haunting because Se7en is an extremely dark cinematic piece, which therefore means that on a certain level, this dark view matches our own reality. The cast is extraordinary as well, especially Kevin Spacey who plays the killer(whose name is purposely not included in the opening credits), despite his very short appearance, he still manages to make an impact, and he is perhaps the best choice I could think of for the role.
Cinematographically, Se7en is quite amazing. Its aesthetic ties in with Fincher’s other films, as the gloomy and bleak atmosphere usually conveys is definitely present here. The plot takes place in an unnamed city which I find quite interesting because that means it could be anywhere. The haunting darkness remains throughout the whole entire film - except the ending, which is the only brightly lit scene in the whole movie. This jarring choice completely juxtaposes what actually happens in the ending.
There is no right way to describe the ending of this film in words, as one must see it themselves to truly understand, but it revolves around the killer finding a way to strongly prove his twisted point and leave an ever-lasting mark. The perception of the characters and the ideas of the film that the audience forms while watching is completely turned upside down. It is very poignant, while being extremely clever at the same time. It does not even feel like an ending, because the idea of it remains alive long after watching it.
To conclude, Se7en is an outstanding film from many points of view, including plot, cast and cinematography. It has the audience completely captivated and questioning their own morals and thoughts, which is what I believe a good and memorable movie should do - get inside the mind of the audience, captivate them throughout the movie, keep them on the edge of their seat, but also leave them with something to think about after watching it.